# Precision-Floating-Pointer-Adder-using-System-Verilog-
Simulated and synthesised an adder for the shortened (16-bit) version of the 32-bit IEEE 754 single-precision floating-point format using a State Machine.

The Adder is implemented as a Synchronous implementation, using Sequential logic utilising non-blocking statements and employing an always_ff block sensitive to the positive edge of the clock. A State Machine is defined within the block to sequentially execute the following steps: storing inputs, component extraction, checking for special cases, performing addition or subtraction based on the signs, sorting or shifting of output, before finally storing the result and asserting the ready signal.  

## Detailed Functionality: 
### Extraction & Special Cases: 
The inputs are split into the respective sign bit, biased exponent bits, and mantissa with a leading 1 restored. Once extracted, special cases (e.g., zeros, infinity, and Not-a-Number) are detected. If such a case is found, the state machine jumps directly to the result state and concludes. For valid inputs, the exponents are compared, and the mantissa with the restored 1 is shifted accordingly. The mantissa with the larger exponent is stored in the non-shift register and vice versa.  

### Alignment & Sum/Difference Operation: 
The exponent of the result is determined at this stage (it may be incremented or decremented in the final normalisation step as per the location of the most significant 1 of the sum/difference register). The sign bit of the result is  also assigned according to the sign of the higher exponent or the larger mantissa if the exponents are equal. Once both the numbers are equivalent in terms of the exponents, the shifted and non-shifted mantissas are then added or subtracted based on the sign bits. The result is stored in a 9-bit register to handle a potential overflow due to the addition of MSB 1s.  

### Normalisation & Result: 
Once the mathematical operation between the shifted and non-shifted mantissas is computed, the most significant 1 is located, and the bits following this 1 are extracted and saved as the resultant mantissa. This is done to comply with the 754 standard, as the leading 1 is assumed and not part of the result. Due to the 9-bit limitation, a rounding to the nearest smaller number may occur depending on to leading 1-bit location. The exponent of the result is adjusted either by incrementing or decrementing with respect to the bit position of the leading 1. The resultant sign bit, exponent bits and mantissa bits are finally concatenated in the sum register and are output through the bus, while simultaneously asserting the ready output to indicate the start of the next addition sequence.

## Testing and Verification: 
To test and verify the working of the adder, Modelsim can be used to compile and simulate the Adder code and the test bench. Upon compiling, the syntax and compilation errors can be identified. In order to verify the complete logic, the test bench provided can be utilised. The $display and $monitor constructs have been used in the main module to monitor intermediate values and aid in debugging the code.  

The inputs in the test bench can manually be changed for each run and are converted to the bfloat32 format using shortrealtobits in the test bench. To test multiple values, the test bench has been modified to include random numbers using the min + $random () % (max – min) and perform multiple tests with the $repeat () construct. The test bench can be simulated on Modelsim, and the results of the designed bfloat16 adder can be compared with the actual sum of the numbers. 
The simulation waveforms can be used to verify the availability of the result and the assertion of the ready signal, which has been implemented by introducing a separate state in the tested code to indicate when the design expects the next input in the subsequent clock cycle. 

Quartus can now be used to compile the design. The testing was performed on the DE1-SoC development board. The compilation report calculated the FPGA resource utilisation. The summary report indicated that logic utilisation was less than 1% (196/32070), with a total of 112 registers and 51 pins out of the total 457 pins used. Optimisation during the synthesis resulted in a merger between the mantissa b register and the restored mantissa b register, leading to a decrement of 42 registers. The RTL view generated using the Netlist viewer tool of Quartus showed the logic implementation. It depicted the number of adders, multipliers and logic gates required for the design implementation.  
